# Von-Neumann Architecture vs Harvard Architecture

Von-Neumann: Common memory for instruction (I) and data (D)

Harvard Architecture: Different memories/buses for I and D: simultaneous flow of I and D, but more complex.

## The System Bus Model

Three basic units
- Memory
- Cpu
  - Control
  - Datapath (ALU, registers)
- I/O devices

Bus: a collection of wires. System bus has:
- Data bus
- Address bus
- Control bus

When shared among several communicating entities, each entity has its own identity ("address").

Additional buses:
- Power bus
- I/O bus

Usually computers have different speeds of busses (e.g. PCI for slower I/O and PCIe for faster traffic). Slide suggests that PCIe can talk to the CPU cache memory directly, while PCI can only talk to the memory.

Advantages of the bus:
- Lower wiring complexity
Disadvantages:
- Slower communication due to shared resource and protocol

Systems can have multiple system buses (although the teacher was a little hesitant about the implications).

## Bus arbitration
- Who will be the next bus master?
- A bus arbiter decides who becomes the bus master and when.
- Arbitration schemes:
  - Centralized
    - Simple (one bus request/grant line)
    - With priority levels
    - Fully centralized (one bus request/grant line per component)
  - Decentralized

## Bus clocking
- Synchronous (uses a clock signal)
  - Bus clock slower than CPU clock
  - Faster memory has no effect if bus clock remains unchanged
- Asynchronous (no clock signal)

## Methods for I/O
- Programmed I/O (polling)
  - Every I/O device is seen as a register and the CPU loads the data from them periodically
- Interrupt driven
  - I/O devices inform CPU when they need to perform a transaction
  - Specific interrupt request line is used for this
- Direct Memory Access (DMA)
  - DMA controller transfers data to/from memory
  - CPU sets up the DMA controller through a set of registers
  - Upon completion the DMA informs the processor with an interrupt

