# Lecture 1: Intellectual Property and IT (Part 1)
Already bored

## Two types of rights
**Absolute right**: even without a contract, when someone borrows something from you, you still have an absolute right to your property.

**Relative / Personal right**: the agreement only works between the owner of the property and the one who signed the contract. (e.g. car rental)

## Intellectual property (IP) protection by European Law
**Property:** you can do whatever the fuck you want with your property, without a contract.
  
IP is property and governed by absolute rights. IP-rights may contain:
- Copyrights
- Database rights 
- Patents 
- Trademarks
- Trade Secrets

Using software generates copies internally on the computer and as such using software requires an authorizing license.

## Directive 2009/24/EC (?) 
An EU directive that stated software is protected under copyright law.

## Copyright
Software Copyright protects the expression of software. This entails things such as
- source/object code <- needs to be original and have personal imprint of the author
- UI/UX (?)
- Icons
- Content (?)

This does not include:
- the functionality
- the (included) programming language
- the format of data files

OpenOffice vs. Microsoft Word: When does copyright start to apply?

You can copy functionality, as long as it is original source code.

A software license is an relative right. It allows a party to use the source code of the other party.
Second hand licenses (Licenses that are sold again) is valid based on the verdict of the court in accordance to Copyright Directive (CD) Article 4.2. However this has several conditions:
- License for an unlimited period
- Remuneration corresponding to the economic value of the copy
- First acquirer has deleted his copy






## Slides
- Property vs. intellectual property
  - Absolute rights on objects vs. creative perfromances
- Copyright
  - Source, owner, exploitation rights, home copy, personality right, exhaustion doctrine, transfer, license
  - Closed source vs. open source software
- Database right
  - Source, owner, exploitation rights, spin-off theory, transfer
- Patent law
  - Coputer programs as such excluded
- Brand names and trade names vs domain names









